DOCSP-46479: document Scout integration (#3261)
jenssegers/laravel-mongodb: docs/scout.txt

.. _laravel-scout:

============================
Integrated Search with Scout
============================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: php framework, odm, code example, text search, atlas

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the Laravel Scout feature in
your {+odm-long+} application. Scout allows you to implement full-text
search on your Eloquent models. To learn more, see `Laravel Scout
<https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/scout>`__ in the
Laravel documentation.

> The Scout Integration for {+odm-long+} provides the following

Reviewer: S: lowercase (?)
```suggestion
The Scout integration for {+odm-long+} provides the following
```

functionality:

- Provides an abstraction to create search indexes on documents in

>   MongoDB collections and other search engines. In MongoDB, this feature

Reviewer: S: I'm a little confused by the grouping of "MongoDB and other search engines", maybe just removing "other" would work
```suggestion
  MongoDB collections and search engines. In MongoDB, this feature
```

Author: can use external instead, to match the future section at the end

  allows you to create :atlas:`Atlas Search indexes
  </atlas-search/manage-indexes/>`.

- Allows you to automatically replicate data from MongoDB into a
  search engine such as `Meilisearch <https://www.meilisearch.com/>`__
  or `Algolia <https://www.algolia.com/>`__. You can use a MongoDB Eloquent
  model as the source to import and index.

.. note:: Deployment Compatibility

   You can use Laravel Scout only when you connect to MongoDB Atlas
   clusters. This feature is not available for self-managed or
   serverless deployments.

> 

Reviewer: S: since this page reads like a step-by-step tutorial, you could make it a tutorial (with `.. procedure:`) or just include a numbered list here with each of the steps (i.e., "Complete the following steps to configure Scout and create a searchable collection:
1. :ref:`Install Scout Package <link to section>`
2. :ref: `Add the Searchable Trait to Your Model <link>`
3. ..."

Author: I'll make it a procedure

Install Scout Package
---------------------

> Before you can use Scout in your application, you must run the following
> command to install Laravel Scout:

Reviewer: S: clarify where to run the command; I assume from the project root
```suggestion
Before you can use Scout in your application, you must run the following
command from your application's root directory to install Laravel Scout:
```

.. code-block:: bash
   
   composer require laravel/scout

Add the Searchable Trait to Your Model
--------------------------------------

Add the ``Laravel\Scout\Searchable`` trait to an Eloquent model to make

> it searchable. This example uses the ``Movie`` model, which represents
> documents in the ``sample_mflix.movies`` collection.

Reviewer: S: you can make this sentence more of an introduction/slightly more descriptive of the code:
```suggestion
it searchable. The following example adds this trait to the ``Movie`` model, which represents
documents in the ``sample_mflix.movies`` collection:
```

To configure Scout in your application, create a file named
``scout.php`` in your application's ``config`` directory. Paste the
following code into the file to configure Scout:

.. code-block:: php
   :caption: config/scout.php

   <?php
   
   return [
       'driver' => env('SCOUT_DRIVER', 'mongodb'),
   
       'mongodb' => [
           'connection' => env('SCOUT_MONGODB_CONNECTION', 'mongodb'),
       ],

       'prefix' => env('SCOUT_PREFIX', 'scout_'),
   ];

The preceding code specifies the following configuration:

- Uses MongoDB as the default search driver

- Specifies ``scout_`` as the prefix for the collection name of the
  searchable collection used by Scout

.. tip:: Queueing

   When using Scout, consider configuring a queue driver to reduce
   response times for your application's web interface. To learn more,
   see the `Queuing section
   <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/scout#queueing>`__
   of the Laravel Scout documentation and the :ref:`laravel-queues` guide.

Create the Search Index
-----------------------

After you configure Scout and set your default search driver, you can
create your searchable collection and search index by running the

> following command:

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
following command from your application's root directory:
```

.. code-block:: bash

   php artisan scout:index 'App\Models\Movie'

Because you set MongoDB as the default search driver, the preceding
command creates the search collection with an Atlas Search index in your
MongoDB database. The collection is named ``scout_movies``, based on the prefix
set in the preceding section. The Atlas Search index is named ``scout``
and has the following configuration:

.. code-block:: json

   {
     "mappings": {
       "dynamic": true
     }
   }

.. note::

>    It generally takes up to a minute for MongoDB to create and finalize

Reviewer: S: since the first "it" is a little vague
```suggestion
   MongoDB can take up to a minute to create and finalize
```

You can use Scout to replicate data from a source collection into a
searchable collection. The following command replicates and indexes data
from the ``movies`` collection into the ``scout_movies`` collection
created in the preceding section:

.. code-block:: bash

   php artisan scout:import 'App\Models\Movie'

The documents are automatically indexed for Atlas Search queries.

Select Fields to Import
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You might not need all the fields from your source documents in your
searchable collection. Limiting the fields you replicate can improve
your application's speed and performance.

You can select specific fields to import by defining the
``toSearchableArray()`` method in your Eloquent model class. The
following code demonstrates how to define ``toSearchableArray()`` to
select only the ``plot`` and ``title`` fields for replication:

.. code-block:: php
   
   class Movie extends Model
   {
       ....
       public function toSearchableArray(): array
       {
           return [
               'plot' => $this->plot,
               'title' => $this->title,
           ];
       }
   }

Use an External Search Engine

> -----------------------------

Reviewer: S: I'd comment out the header and include it in the TODO

search on your Eloquent models. To learn more, see `Laravel Scout
<https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/scout>`__ in the
Laravel documentation.

The Scout integration for {+odm-long+} provides the following
functionality:

- Provides an abstraction to create search indexes on documents in
  MongoDB collections and external search engines. In MongoDB, this feature
  allows you to create :atlas:`Atlas Search indexes
  </atlas-search/manage-indexes/>`.

- Allows you to automatically replicate data from MongoDB into a
  search engine such as `Meilisearch <https://www.meilisearch.com/>`__
  or `Algolia <https://www.algolia.com/>`__. You can use a MongoDB Eloquent
  model as the source to import and index.

.. note:: Deployment Compatibility

   You can use Laravel Scout only when you connect to MongoDB Atlas
   clusters. This feature is not available for self-managed or
   serverless deployments.

Scout for Atlas Search Tutorial
-------------------------------

This section demonstrates how to use the Scout integration in your
application to support Atlas Search queries.

.. procedure::
   :style: connected

>    .. step:: Install Scout package

Reviewer: S: to make this step a [full sentence](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/style/tasks/#steps)
```suggestion
   .. step:: Install the Scout package
```

      
      - Uses MongoDB as the default search driver
      - Specifies ``scout_`` as the prefix for the collection name of the
        searchable collection
      
      .. tip:: Queueing
      
         When using Scout, consider configuring a queue driver to reduce
         response times for your application's web interface. To learn more,
         see the `Queuing section
         <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/scout#queueing>`__
         of the Laravel Scout documentation and the :ref:`laravel-queues` guide.

   .. step:: Create the Atlas Search index

      After you configure Scout and set your default search driver, you can
      create your searchable collection and search index by running the
      following command from your application's root directory:
      
      .. code-block:: bash
      
         php artisan scout:index 'App\Models\Movie'
      
      Because you set MongoDB as the default search driver, the preceding
      command creates the search collection with an Atlas Search index in your
      MongoDB database. The collection is named ``scout_movies``, based on the prefix

>       set in the preceding section. The Atlas Search index is named ``scout``

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
      set in the preceding step. The Atlas Search index is named ``scout``
```

      and has the following configuration:

      .. code-block:: json
      
         {
           "mappings": {
             "dynamic": true
           }
         }
      
      .. note::
      
         MongoDB can take up to a minute to create and finalize
         an Atlas Search index, so the ``scout:index`` command might not
         return a success message immediately.

   .. step:: Import data into the searchable collection

      You can use Scout to replicate data from a source collection into a
      searchable collection. The following command replicates and indexes data
      from the ``movies`` collection into the ``scout_movies`` collection

>       created in the preceding section:

Reviewer: S:
```suggestion
      created in the preceding step:
```

      
      .. code-block:: bash
      
         php artisan scout:import 'App\Models\Movie'
      
      The documents are automatically indexed for Atlas Search queries.

      .. tip:: Select Fields to Import

         You might not need all the fields from your source documents in your
         searchable collection. Limiting the fields you replicate can improve
         your application's speed and performance.
         
         You can select specific fields to import by defining the
         ``toSearchableArray()`` method in your Eloquent model class. The
         following code demonstrates how to define ``toSearchableArray()`` to
         select only the ``plot`` and ``title`` fields for replication:
         
         .. code-block:: php
            
            class Movie extends Model
            {
                ....
                public function toSearchableArray(): array
                {
                    return [
                        'plot' => $this->plot,
                        'title' => $this->title,
                    ];
                }
            }

> 

Reviewer: S: the end of this page seems a little abrupt, maybe add a final conclusion sentence along the lines of:
```suggestion
After completing these steps, you can use your {+odm-long+} application to run Atlas Search queries on a searchable collection called ``scout_movies``.
```

Author: good idea, I was also mulling over what to put here. I was planning on linking out to the still in prog atlas docs in #3255

.. _laravel-scout:

===========================
Full-Text Search with Scout
===========================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: php framework, odm, code example, text search, atlas

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the Laravel Scout feature in
your {+odm-long+} application. Scout allows you to implement full-text
search on your Eloquent models. To learn more, see `Laravel Scout
<https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/scout>`__ in the
Laravel documentation.

The Scout integration for {+odm-long+} provides the following
functionality:

- Provides an abstraction to create search indexes on documents in
  MongoDB collections and external search engines. In MongoDB, this feature
  allows you to create :atlas:`Atlas Search indexes

>   </atlas-search/manage-indexes/>`.

Reviewer 2: For this part I would not mention other search engines. It's more: create MongoDB Atlas Indexes from any model (SQL or MongoDB).

Author: I can update this list item; can you clarify how one would use Laravel MongoDB to work with SQL models? Is this possible, or is that a general statement about Laravel as a framework in general?

- Allows you to automatically replicate data from MongoDB into a
  search engine such as `Meilisearch <https://www.meilisearch.com/>`__
  or `Algolia <https://www.algolia.com/>`__. You can use a MongoDB Eloquent
  model as the source to import and index.

.. note:: Deployment Compatibility

   You can use Laravel Scout only when you connect to MongoDB Atlas
   clusters. This feature is not available for self-managed or

>    serverless deployments.

Reviewer 2: Search indexes are available using atlas local, or the the `mongodb/mongodb-atlas-local` docker image ([link](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/cli/current/atlas-cli-deploy-docker/)). I use this docker image for testing.

Author: based on the language used on the website, Self-managed refers to Enterprise and Advanced and community edition MongoDB. So, I can adjust the first sentence to say deployments instead of clusters.

.. _laravel-scout:

===========================
Full-Text Search with Scout
===========================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: php framework, odm, code example, text search, atlas

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the Laravel Scout feature in
your {+odm-long+} application. Scout allows you to implement full-text
search on your Eloquent models. To learn more, see `Laravel Scout
<https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/scout>`__ in the
Laravel documentation.

The Scout integration for {+odm-long+} provides the following
functionality:

- Provides an abstraction to create :atlas:`Atlas Search indexes
  </atlas-search/manage-indexes/>` from any MongoDB or SQL model.
  
  .. tip::
    
     We recommend creating Search indexes by using the ``Schema``
     builder methods. To learn more, see the :ref:`TODO DOCSP-46230`

>      section of the Atlas Search guide.

Reviewer 2: It really needs to be made clear in the documentation that if the documents are already in mongodb, then the easiest thing to do is to create a search index rather than use Scout.

I would put flashing lights if I could.

This has the advantage for the search query performance: Scout will run a query on the search engine to retreive IDs, then fetch the models from the database from this IDs. Using Atlas Search on MongoDB Models, we directly get the documents.
Can it be explicated in the docs.

- Allows you to automatically replicate data from MongoDB into a
  search engine such as `Meilisearch <https://www.meilisearch.com/>`__
  or `Algolia <https://www.algolia.com/>`__. You can use a MongoDB Eloquent
  model as the source to import and index.

.. note:: Deployment Compatibility

   You can use Laravel Scout only when you connect to MongoDB Atlas
   deployments. This feature is not available for self-managed or

>    serverless deployments.

Reviewer 2: Serverless servers have been deprecated since you started this PR, I don't think they should be mentioned here. https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/reference/serverless-instance-limitations/

Scout for Atlas Search Tutorial
-------------------------------

This section demonstrates how to use the Scout integration in your

> application to support Atlas Search queries.

Reviewer 2: @"use the Scout integration" seems too vague regarding the 2 ways of replicating the data.

```suggestion
This section demonstrates how to use Scout to compound and index document into MongoDB Atlas Search from Eloquent models (SQL or MongoDB models), and how to query this search index.
```

.. procedure::
   :style: connected
   
   .. step:: Install the Scout package
      
      Before you can use Scout in your application, run the following

>       command from your application's root directory to install Laravel Scout:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Before you can use Scout in your application, run the following
      command from your application's root directory to install the `laravel/scout` package:
```

      
      .. code-block:: bash
              
         composer require laravel/scout

   .. step:: Add the Searchable trait to your model

      Add the ``Laravel\Scout\Searchable`` trait to an Eloquent model to make
      it searchable. The following example adds this trait to the ``Movie``
      model, which represents documents in the ``sample_mflix.movies``

>       collection:

Reviewer 2: This trait provides various methods: `toSearchableArray` to transform the data. This can be used to reformat the document, embed related documents or transform values.

You can add a link to https://laravel.com/docs/11.x/scout#configuring-searchable-data

      
         When using Scout, consider configuring a queue driver to reduce
         response times for your application's web interface. To learn more,
         see the `Queuing section
         <https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/scout#queueing>`__
         of the Laravel Scout documentation and the :ref:`laravel-queues` guide.

   .. step:: Create the Atlas Search index

      After you configure Scout and set your default search driver, you can
      create your searchable collection and search index by running the
      following command from your application's root directory:
        
      .. code-block:: bash
         
         php artisan scout:index 'App\Models\Movie'
        
      Because you set MongoDB as the default search driver, the preceding
      command creates the search collection with an Atlas Search index in your
      MongoDB database. The collection is named ``scout_movies``, based on the prefix
      set in the preceding step. The Atlas Search index is named ``scout``
      and has the following configuration:

      .. code-block:: json
      
         {
           "mappings": {
             "dynamic": true
           }

>          }

Reviewer 2: I added support for custom index definition. https://github.com/mongodb/laravel-mongodb/pull/3281

This can be documented like this: https://laravel.com/docs/11.x/scout#configuring-filterable-data-for-meilisearch

Author: testing this out and then will message when I'm ready for a re-review

===========================
Full-Text Search with Scout
===========================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: php framework, odm, code example, text search, atlas

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the Laravel Scout feature in
your {+odm-long+} application. Scout allows you to implement full-text
search on your Eloquent models. To learn more, see `Laravel Scout
<https://laravel.com/docs/{+laravel-docs-version+}/scout>`__ in the
Laravel documentation.

The Scout integration for {+odm-long+} provides the following
functionality:

- Provides an abstraction to create :atlas:`Atlas Search indexes
  </atlas-search/manage-indexes/>` from any MongoDB or SQL model.
  
  .. important:: Use Schema Builder to Create Search Indexes
    
     If your documents are already in MongoDB, create Search indexes
     by using {+php-library+} or ``Schema`` builder methods to improve
     search query performance. To learn more about creating Search
     indexes, see the :ref:`laravel-as-index` section of the Atlas
     Search guide.

> - Allows you to automatically replicate data from MongoDB into a

Reviewer 2: It seems to me that “allows” is a word to be avoided (exept when talking about permissions, security). It's better to use "enable", for example.

      following command from your application's root directory:
        
      .. code-block:: bash
         
         php artisan scout:index 'App\Models\Movie'
        
      Because you set MongoDB as the default search driver, the preceding
      command creates the search collection with an Atlas Search index in your
      MongoDB database. The collection is named ``scout_movies``, based on the prefix
      set in the preceding step. The Atlas Search index is named ``scout``
      and has the following configuration by default:

      .. code-block:: json
      
         {
           "mappings": {
             "dynamic": true
           }
         }

      .. _laravel-scout-custom-index:

      To customize the index definition, add the ``index-definitions``
      configuration to the ``mongodb`` entry in your
      ``config/scout.php`` file. The following code demonstrates how to
      specify a custom index definition to create on the
      ``scout_movies`` collection:

      .. code-block:: php
      
         'mongodb' => [
             'connection' => env('SCOUT_MONGODB_CONNECTION', 'mongodb'),
             'index-definitions' => [
                 'scout_movies' => [

>                      'mappings' => [

Reviewer 2: I find this page very useful about mappings: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/atlas-search/define-field-mappings/

Also the playground: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/atlas-search/playground/

Author: Will add links!
